I guess we can get started.
All right. So, today we're going to talk
about back prop. And I'm sure for some
of you a lot of this is going to look
familiar. I'm going to start with some
uh sort of refreshers about sort of
basic concepts and uh and talk about
sort of more general formulation of of
uh back prop a little later. and then uh
tomorrow
uh Alfredo will go through like how you
use autograd and things like this in
pytorch. Okay. Uh so basic concepts um
we have parameterized models. So
parameterized models are nothing more
than functions that depends on that
depend on two parameters an input and a
trainable parameter. And there's no
conceptual difference between the
parameter and the input. uh they're just
they're both parameters of the of the
deterministic function.
The uh the thing is though the parameter
is shared across
um training samples whereas the samples
of course are different for every
training sample. So um uh in things like
in in most deep learning frameworks the
parameter is actually implicit to the uh
to the parameterized function. When you
call the function you don't actually
pass the parameter value. it's sort of
stored inside if you if at least in the
object-oriented versions of of models.
But uh
just need to remember that you know you
have parameterized model is just a
parameterized function. It takes an
input and it has a parameter vector. It
produces an output. Uh in simple
supervised running this output goes into
a cost function that compares the output
of the model with the output you want.
Uh here it's called C. The prediction uh
the output of the module is called Y bar
and the C function compares Y and Y bar
where Y is the output you want. Y bar is
the output the output you get.
Um
so I'm giving here two very simple
examples of parameterized functions
which I'm sure you're familiar with. The
first one is a linear model. So linear
model just computes a weighted sum of
the components of its input vector
multiplied by weights. Uh and if you do
linear regression uh with square loss
the the C function is just the the the
square distance you create a distance
between the y vector and the y bar
vector. Uh y and y bar can be vectors or
scalers um or tensors or whatever
doesn't matter. Uh things with numbers
in them basically or things that you can
compute distances uh between that's
actually all you need technically.
uh but here is a slightly more
complicated uh parameterized function
here down uh down the bottom uh which
actually computes nearest neighbor. So
here uh there is uh the input x and then
w is a matrix. Each row of the matrix is
indexed by the index k.
And uh to to compute the output we uh
actually um output the number k
that uh corresponds to the row of w that
is closest to x. Okay. So we compute the
distance between X and a particular row
of W which is W K and then we value over
all K's and we figure out which of those
difference is smallest.
Okay. And we output that K.
So argument that's what the argument
function does, right? It it returns the
the the uh value of the argument that
minimizes the function, right? So it's a
function of K and that returns the K
that minimizes that function.
The point I'm making with this uh which
is a complicated way of explaining
nearest neighbor is that uh the the type
of computation that takes place in your
parameterized model could be very
complicated. It doesn't have to be just
like a neural net something that you
compute with weighted sums and and and
nonlinearities. It can be something
complicated that involves a minimization
of something else. Minim could be the
minimum of some function. Okay.
And we'll come back to this in a few
weeks.
Is it?
Yes.
W
X and the weight matrix.
You can denote it in a different way. uh
I could have written uh uh w the w
matrix multiplied by uh let's say a z
vector and the z vector would be
constrained to be a a one hot
and in which case you would select a
column of w and you could do a mean over
this the z vector okay then I mean it
would be a different notation but kind
of a different effect a similar effect
then you know I would have to read to
write another equation like you know z
is one hot and explain what that means.
Um,
I mean, forget about the notation, you
know, just remember the fact that uh uh
there could be something complicated
going on in in this parameterized
function. It's not necessarily just, you
know, a very simple very simple thing.
So, what I've done with this diagram
here is that um I've introduced a sort
of way of denoting of sort of writing
neural nets and various other models as
block diagrams.
uh and I'm I'm using uh three different
types of symbols here or four really. Uh
the bubbles represent variables.
The the bubbles that are filled up
represent variables that are observed.
So x is an observed variable. It's the
input to your system. So you observe it
on the training set and the test set and
whatever. Uh y bar is a computed
variable. So it's it's uh something
that's just you know produced by
deterministic function. you can just
compute from the observe variable
through a deterministic function.
Uh so y similarly is an observed
variable because on or it's observed on
the training set. It's not observed on
the test set but during training it's
observed.
Um and then you have two types of
functional modules. One type is those
kind of blue round shaped modules which
represent deterministic functions and
the the the round uh side indicates in
which direction it's easy to compute.
Okay, so here you can compute Y bar from
X. Uh it's considerably more complicated
to compute X from Y bar.
If I give you Y bar, you would have a
hard time giving me an X that
corresponds to it. Okay.
Um and then you have another type of
module which are usually used to
represent cost functions represented by
squares, red squares to make them more
visible in this case. and they have an
implicit output uh which is a scalar
output a single number and they can take
multiple inputs and basically compute a
single number uh usually a distance
between the inputs or something similar
to that.
So with those sort of basic uh symbols
you can you know you can represent sort
of standard supervised learning systems.
Um for those of you who are familiar
with graphical models, this u this is a
similar notation that is used in uh
what's called factor graphs
where the squares are factors. Factor
graphs don't have those deterministic
functions because they don't care about
in which you know which way uh
dependencies can be computed but in our
case it's really important.
Okay. Uh so loss functions uh so loss
functions are things that we minimize
during training and there's two types of
loss. There's the per sample loss. So uh
in this case L of XY W. So you give it a
sample a pair X and Y and a value of the
parameter and it computes just a scalar
value. Okay. In our case here we use a
very simple loss which is just equal to
the cost module the output of the cost
module that we put on top of our system.
This is kind of the standard sort of
supervised running uh paradigm here uh
where the loss is simply the average uh
uh I mean the per sample loss is just
the output of the cost function that we
we put in. It's not always the case.
And then the loss that we actually
minimize during training is the average
loss over a training set. So training
set S is a set of pairs X of P Y of P
for P= 0 to P minus one
and the overall loss uh which depends of
course on the training set and the
parameter values uh is the average of
the per sample loss over all the samples
and uh I forgot to say in the first time
here it's XY belongs to Yes.
[clears throat]
So, uh machine learning is all about
optimizing functions most of the time
minimizing functions. Sometimes
maximizing functions occasionally
uh finding Nash equilibria between two
functions as in the case of GANs but
most of the time we minimize functions.
Uh and we do this with gradient based
methods not necessarily gradient descent
but gradientbased methods. What is a
gradientbased method? Gradient based
method is a method that um finds the
minimum of a function assuming that you
can easily compute the gradient of that
function. So that assumes the function
is more or less differentiable. It
doesn't actually have to be everywhere
differentiable technically. Um it needs
to be continuous and it needs to be
almost everywhere differentiable
otherwise you run into trouble.
But it can have kinks in it as long as
they're not too nasty.
Um
and gradient descent of course as you
probably know consists in uh computing
the the gradient. So you see a function
here at the top um it's got a minimum uh
at the top right I I've drawn the lines
of equal cost of that function and the
arrows that you see are the gradient
vectors. The gradient is pointing up
okay at every uh every location and the
gradient is always orthogonal to the
lines of uh equal cost okay equal
altitude if you want
okay so gradient descent is like um
you know being in the mountain in the
fog and it's night and you can't see
anything but you want to go down to the
village and so you look around you and
you look for the direction of steepest
descent and you take a
Okay, so the little algorithm here at
the top, the W vector, which is your
position, is replaced by the W, your
current W vector minus some constant
times the gradient vector, and the
gradient vector points up. So when you
do minus, uh, you're kind of walking
downhill in the direction of steepest
descent. Now, this is if ADA is a scalar
constant, but in sophisticated
algorithms, ADA can actually be a
matrix.
So if it's a matrix if if it's a
positive semi-definite matrix you will
still go down go downhill except that
not necessarily in the direction of
steepest descent. In fact the direction
of steepest descent is not necessarily
the one you want to go to. Um if you
have a situation like the one at the top
where the the value is a little elegated
the gradient actually does not point
towards the minimum. It points to you
know off off center. And so if you want
to go directly to the minimum, you don't
want to follow the gradient. You want to
be a little smarter than this. And by
using uh uh sort of ADA that are
matrices, you can actually you could in
principle do this uh with so-called
second order methods.
U which are still gradient based
methods.
Um but they're kind of impractical in
most cases. Uh we'll talk about some
issues with this uh in a few weeks. Now
um there are algorithms that are not
gradient based
um optimization algorithms that are not
gradient based. So when your function is
not differentiable when it's like a golf
course you know it's flat and it's got a
hole in it or when it's kind of
staircase like where the gradient
doesn't give you any information useful
information or when it may be
differentiable but you don't know the
function. you don't you don't work the
you don't write you didn't write the
program that actually computes it
because that function might might be the
entire environment around you
um then you cannot compute the gradient
efficiently okay so then you have to
resort to other methods methods are
called uh zeroth order methods or
gradient free methods and there's a
whole bunch a whole family of those
functions uh of those methods which I'm
not going to talk about okay at
uh deep learning is all about gradient
based methods.
Uh that said, if you're interested in
reinforcement learning, most of
reinforcement learning actually uses uh
gradient estimation without the
gradient. What you want is um I don't
know you want to
get a robot to learn to u ride a bike
and once in a while the robot falls and
you don't have a gradient for the
objective function that says don't fall
or the objective function that measures
how long you the bike stays up without
falling. Nobody tells you it what to do
to minimize that cost function. Right?
So you have to try things. you can't
comput a gradient of that function.
Okay, so in RL your cost function is not
differentiable most of the time but the
network that computes the output that
goes into the environment is
differentiable. Okay, so from that point
on that's uh that's gradient based only
the cost is not differentiable. Okay, so
there'll be a situation like uh the
diagram I I showed earlier.
Imagine here that g is differentiable.
You can compute the gradient of the
output of G with respect to the
parameters and its input and everything.
But C is not differentiable. In fact,
it's completely unknown. The only thing
you know about C is that if you give it
a Y bar and a Y, it tells you the value,
but doesn't give you the gradient. Okay,
that's kind of what RL is. There are
other things about RL. Okay, but that's
the basic difference between
reinforcement learning and uh supervised
learning.
Professor,
yeah. Is is like the reward enough to
do away with like in you get the reward,
right?
Well, the reward is just the output of
C. That's all. Okay. So C is a black box
and what you get is the output of C.
You don't you don't get a Y either,
right? So you're not being told what the
correct answer is. Uh you just have a
black box, you give it a Y bar, and it
gives you C. That's it. You can't
compute the gradient of C with respect
to Y bar.
We use gradient estimation method.
That's right. So what you do is you
change Y bar a little bit and you see
does C go up or down. If it goes down,
you kind of reinforce that. If it goes
up, you do something else.
Okay. So basically, you're telling the
system how good it's is doing without
telling it the correct answer. And it
doesn't have access to a gradient.
Okay. So what that tells you is that RL
is horribly inefficient right because
you don't have a gradient. So you have
to try you know if the if the output uh
y bar is low dimensional then you know
it's okay right um you can you can try
to make it larger smaller things like
that but it's not too bad if y bar is a
high dimensional vector
um there's like such a huge space to
search there's probably no way you're
going to find an optimal uh value for it
unless you try lots and lots of
different times right
Um so that's a huge problem with RL.
A lot of techniques in RL actually I'm
not going to talk about RL in this
course actually except today maybe
uh but a very popular technique in RL is
so-called acttoitic methods and a critic
method basically consists in having a
second C module which you know which is
a trainable module and you train your C
your own C module which is
differentiable to approximate the one to
approximate the cost function the value
function that you get the rewards the
reward function you get.
So reward is the inverse of a cost.
Okay. So I mean this a negative of a
cost
would be more like a punishment
actually. But um so then that's that's a
way of uh making the cost function
differentiable or at least approximating
it by a differentiable function and then
you can just use back prop. So the you
know
uh AC AAC and AAC
are versions of this
acttoitic advantage acttocritic etc.
Okay. Um
right so what you have to know how to do
is compute the
gradient of
your per sample uh your of your
objective function with respect to the
parameters. In practice, uh we'll use
stocastic gradient as you um probably
aware. So instead of uh computing the
gradient of the entire objective
function which is the average of all
samples, we just take one sample
[clears throat] compute the loss L big L
compute the gradient of this loss with
respect to the parameters and then take
one step in the negative gradient
direction.
Okay, so that's the the the second
formula here. Uh W is replaced by W
minus some step size times the gradient
of the per sample loss function uh with
respect to the parameter for given
sample XP YP.
Yep.
Like in recent papers they tried to
increase the B size by a lot and then
convergence final conversion accuracy
dip uh by if you use like a smaller Why
did that happen?
Okay, so uh in practice people use
batches. So instead of uh doing this on
a single sample, so first of all, if you
do this on a single sample, you're going
to get a very noisy trajectory, you're
going to get a trajectory like the one
you see here at the bottom where instead
of the parameter vector directly kind of
going downhill, it's going to oscillate.
So some people say it should not be
called SGD which means stoastic gradient
descent because it's not actually a
descent algorithm. should be called
stocastic gradient optimization but it's
it's stochastic so it's very noisy every
sample you get is going to pull in a
different direction and it's just the
average that pulls you towards the
minimum of the average
um so it looks inefficient but in fact
it's actually fast it's much faster than
batch gradient at least in the context
of machine learning when uh the samples
have some redundancy between them and uh
it it goes faster to do stocastic
gradient so uh to the the question the
batching. So what people do most of the
time is that they compute the average of
the gradient over a batch of samples not
a single sample
and then do one step and the only reason
for doing this this has nothing to do
with uh you know algorithmic
um uh convergence uh efficacy or
anything. The only reason for doing this
is because the kind of hardware we that
is given to us that are is at our
disposal GPUs and multi-core CPUs is
more efficient if you
if you have batches. It's easier to
parallelize. So you get more efficient
computation use of your hardware if you
use batches. It's a bad reason for
batching, but we have no choice until,
you know, someone builds a piece of
hardware that actually is properly
designed.
[clears throat]
The reason we have to do this again is
for is because the the chips that we
have, you know, Nvidia GPUs um are sort
of, you know, heavily parallelized, but
they they they're paralyzed in a simple
way and um the simplest way to paralyze
is to batch.
Yes. uh if there was no redundancy in
the data set would it be better to use
full batch gradient? [clears throat]
Yeah, but uh okay so
so here is why stoastic gradient is is
is better right? If I give you a million
samples but in this million samples I
actually I only have actually 10,000
different samples and I repeat those
10,000 samples a 100 times and I shuffle
them and I give you this training sample
and I give you it's a million samples.
you don't know it's actually only 10,000
samples repeated 100 times. If you use
batch gradient, you're going to compute
100 times the same quantities and
average them. So you're going to spend
100 times more computation than
necessary. Whereas if you use stocastic
gradient, by the time you've seen 20,000
samples, you've already done two
iterations, you know, two passes through
your entire training set. Okay? So it'll
be at least 100 times more efficient. So
the question is you know what's uh you
know how how much can you
uh average in a batch without losing uh
you know efficiency in the redundancy
and some people have done experiments
with this. There's some empirical
evidence that the number of samples that
you can put in a batch is roughly
uh equal to the number of categories you
have if you do classification
between one and two times the number of
categories you have. So if you train on
image net you have 10,00 categories uh
you can you can have batches up to about
2,000 and be beyond this you start
losing uh conversion speed.
Just a follow question what if all the
million images were independent like
there was no redundancy. uh that means
they're completely random basically I
mean that never occurs right because
think about okay think about the
following scenario that uh you give me
that training set and what I do is that
I split it in half and I use the first
as a training set and the second one the
second half as a validation set if there
is zero redundancy in your in your um in
your set that means my machine is not
going to work at all right it's not
going to be able to generalize on the
second half right so if there is any
possibility of generalization There has
to be some redundancy.
Okay.
So let's start simple and talk about
traditional neural nets. Okay.
Traditional neural nets
uh are basically interspersed layers of
linear operations and points nonlinear
operations.
So the linear operation you have an
input vector you comput a weighted sum
of that vector
uh with a bunch of weights and in this
case here we have six inputs with three
hidden units in the first layer. So
there's three different sets of weights
with which we compute weighted sums of
the six inputs.
The uh conceptually the operation to go
from the input the sixdimensional input
vector to the threedimensional weighted
sum is just a matrix vector
multiplication right take the input
vector multiply by a matrix formed by
the weights
uh it's going to be a 3x six matrix
right and so you multiply this by six
dimensional vector you get a
threedimensional vector
okay so that's the first type of
operation in a classical neural net and
the second type of operation is that you
take all the components of the the
vector the weighted sums and you pass
them through simple nonlinearities. In
this case, this is called a relu. It's
called a half wave rectification in uh
engineering. Um you know there's
different names for it but basically
it's the positive part mathematically.
Uh so it's equal to identity when x when
the argument is positive and it's equal
to to zero when the argument is
negative. And then you repeat the
process.
So the third stage is again a linear
stage. Multiply that threedimensional
vector by a matrix. In this case a 2x3
matrix. You get a two dimensional
vector. Pass the components to
nonlinearities.
Okay. Um I call this a two-layer network
because I think what matters are the
pairs linear nonlinear. Okay. So most
people will call this a two-layer
network. Some people will call this a
three-layer network because they count
the variables. But I don't think that's
fair. You do this, but you don't want
you don't want to do this.
Um, if there is no nonlinearities in the
in the middle, as I said last week, uh,
you might as well have a single layer
because the product of two linear
functions is a linear function. And so
you can collapse them into a single one.
Basically, a single matrix that is the
product of the two matrices.
Okay. So here is here it is in a little
more detail. Uh the sum of unit i is
so s i which is a weighted sum for unit
i is uh is the sum over all the
predecessors of i which is denoted up of
i. Okay.
Uh so the J index goes over all the
predecessors of I of WIJ times Zj where
Zj is the output the J output from the
previous layer. This is a sort of stack
you know kind of regular layered neural
net
and then you take uh a particular SI and
you pass it through one one of those
nonlinear functions f uh and you get zi
Okay, so now let's talk about uh how we
compute gradients and things like this.
And there's two forms of it. Okay, there
is an intuitive form that I'm going to
explain right now. Uh which does not
even require you to know what a
derivative is, funnily enough. Um and
then there is a slightly more general
form and there's an even more general
form that maybe I'll talk about next
week.
Okay, so let's say we have a big
network. We have a cost function. Um,
and so our thing has an x and a y and
it's got a cost coming out. But in fact,
you don't need to make this assumption.
The only assumption you need to make is
that you have some parameterized
function that produces a scaler on the
output. That's it. Okay.
Um, and somewhere in that network, you
have a nonlinear function h. Um, I
called it f in the previous slide, but I
called it h here. So it takes one of
those weighted sum s you pass it through
this h function and then it produces one
of those z variables. Okay, I'm not
putting an index here because you know
it's just I'm taking one particular
uh
uh you know one of those functions
outside of the network and I view the
the rest of the network as kind of a
black box. So let's assume that okay so
we're going to use chain rule. chain
rule if you remember from kindergarten.
Um,
okay. High school. Okay, college. Um,
if you have two functions that follow
each other, you know, g of h of s and
you want to differentiate it. Uh, so g
of h of s prime is equal to the
derivative of g at point h of s
multiplied by the derivative of h at
point s.
All right, this going back right clear.
Okay. Um,
but if you've gone through uh, you know,
couple years a college, you can write
this uh, the way Newton wrote it or
earlier or whatever uh, with the
infinite decimal quantities. So you can
write dc over ds which means the
derivative of c with respect to s
is equal to dc over dz * dz over d s.
Okay, so it's the derivative of C with
respect to Z z multiplied by the
derivative of Z with respect to S. And
the nice the nice reason for writing it
like this is that it's obvious you can
simplify by DZ, right? You have DZ at
the bottom and at the top
and so by simplifying by DZ, this is the
second line, you get DZ over DS. Okay,
so you kind of split the the derivative
by having sort of an intermediate
variable that you put at the bottom and
at the top, right? It's very simple
manipulation, symbolic manipulation.
Now, DZ over D S is just the derivative
of Z with respect to S. But Z is equal
to H of S. So that's just H prime of S.
Okay, so D over DS is equal to D over DZ
* H prime of S. So if if someone gives
you the derivative of the cost function
with respect to
Z,
you multiply by the derivative of your
nonlinear function and you get the
derivative of the cost function with
respect to S.
Okay? So imagine you have a chain of
those functions in your network. You can
back propagate by multiplying by the
derivatives of all those h functions h
functions one after the other all the
way back to the to the bottom.
Okay. So basically if you want to
compute a gradient you basically have to
use a network that looks very much like
this one except you have signals that go
backwards and wherever you had an h
function what you have now is a
derivative coming from the top.
Okay, it's a scalar just the same as Z.
You multiply it by the derivative of the
H function
and then you get the derivative of the
cost function with respect to the
[clears throat] input variable to H
which is S.
So basically what you what you have now
is a basically a transform network that
computes your gradient. Okay.
Now you can convince yourself of this
because uh if you don't really sort of
completely grock chain rule which I hope
you do but um imagine that you are you
know twiddling s by little okay we're
going to we're going to perturb s by ds.
So as we go through h has a slope which
is s prime of s. So Z is going to be
perturbed by DS times that derivative,
right? DS * H prime of S. Okay.
And this is what is being written here.
Uh perturbing S by DS will perturb Z by
DZ equal DS * H prime of S.
This will perturb C by this whole
prohibition DZ times the gradient of I
mean the derivative of C with respect to
to Z, right? Which is DC over DZ.
So basically we get that DC
equals DZ the perturbation of Z. So
perturbation of C is equal to the
perturbation of Z DZ times the gradient
of or the derivative of C with respect
to Z.
Okay. But we've computed this uh uh DZ
before. We know it's ds * h prime of s.
So we just substitute in and then we
pass d s on the other side
and we get simply that dc over d s equal
dc over dz times h prime of s. Okay, we
just redive chain rule. Okay, I've done
nothing more than rederiving chain rule.
But it's a little more intuitive if you
think of it in terms of you know
twiddling things around. And sometimes
it's useful when you're writing the back
prop function for a module to think in
those terms.
Okay, because sometimes it's easier to
think about it in those terms than to
actually write down the equations.
Um, all right.
Now, we had two types of modules in our
in our neural net. The other one is a
linear module. Okay.
And for this one, I'm going to again
view the entire network as a backbox
except for just three connections going
from a Z variable to a bunch of S
variables.
Okay, so an S variable is a weighted
sum. Uh so S0 for example is going to
take Z the Z at the bottom here by
multiplying it by its own W which I call
W0. Okay, I drop all indices that are
annoying.
And so then I can ask again the question
if I if I twiddle Z
by how much will C be twiddled? Okay.
So if I twiddle Z,
S0 is going to be twiddled by Z * W0,
right? Because Z is multiplied by W0. So
if I So if W0 is is two and I twiddle Z
by DZ,
the output U after the weight is going
to be twice. Okay, it's going to be
twiddled by twice the value. But now Z
actually influences several variables.
In this case, three. So it's also going
to uh cause a perturbation for s of one
and s of two. The perturbation for s of1
is going to be uh uh dzw1
and for s of2 is going to be dzw2.
Okay. So the uh overall uh
perturbation
uh
now okay so so we get uh dz * w0 that is
the perturbation for s0 dz * w1 for s1
dz * w2 for s2 but now s0 s1 and s2 are
going to influence c and the question is
by how much so uh c is going to vary by
whatever S0 was varying times the
derivative of C with respect to S0,
right?
But also C is also going to vary because
S1 is varying and also because S2 is
varying. If the variations are small
enough, then the overall variation is
variation is just the sum of the three
variations.
Okay? And so what you have here at the
bottom is that the uh entire variation
of the cost is going to be equal to the
variation of Z multiplied by W0 multip
which is the variation of S0. And then
you're going to have to multiply that by
the derivative of C with respect to S0
which is DC over DS0. Okay. So what you
see here at the last the last equation
is exactly that.
um
and uh and you have to sum the
contributions from the the three
components. Okay. So dc over dz in the
end is dc over ds of 0 * w0 plus dc over
d s1 * w1 plus dc over ds2 * w2.
Okay, when you have a branch like this,
you perturb the input variable. All
branches are perturbed and you have to
sum up the results on the cost function.
Okay, which you assume you know those
are the DC over D whatever variables.
Any question? Is that clear
incomprehensible?
Okay, what does that mean? Like look at
this formula here. It says if I have the
gradient of or if I have the derivative
of C the derivative derivatives of C
with respect to S0, S1 and S2. Okay, all
three of them then I compute the
weighted sum of those derivatives with
the weights going up but I'm using them
going down and that gives me the
derivative of the cost function with
respect to Z
which feeds those three weights. So
basically when you back propagate
through a neural net you compute
weighted some of the gradients using the
weights backwards.
Okay.
All right. So this is to give a little
bit of intuition but there is a much
more general general formulation for
this. Um before we do this uh let's
let's write it this way. Okay. Let's do
it one step at a time. So conceptually a
neural net the way you want to see it is
is more something like this where you
have
u at least a traditional
neural net where you have an input
variable you multiply that input
variable by the first matrix w0 that
gives you s1 and then pass that through
a nonlinearity that gives you z1 then
multiply that by a weight matrix w1 that
gives you s2 pass that through a
nonlinearity that gives you z2
linear again blah blah blah How many how
many uh how many layer neural net is
this?
Three. Yes.
A layer is kind of a pair linear
nonlinear. Right. Most modern neural
nets don't actually have clear linear
nonlinear separations.
They're like more complex things. Okay.
So uh so sk + one basically equals w k *
zk where wk is a matrix zk is a vector
sk + one u is a vector and then zk= hsk
where h is kind of a application of a
scalar h function to every component.
So if you want to write this in PyTorch,
you write something like this.
U there's many ways to write it in
PyTorch. You can you can write it from
scratch, you can write it in a
functional way or you can write it this
way which is more like object-oriented
and it kind of hides a bit of complexity
for you. Um
so you import torch.
Um you import import an N from torch.
You make a sort of an input which is
some three order three tensor.
Uh you count how many elements it has
and that's going to be the size of your
input layer. We're going to turn it into
a vector. Okay, but not yet. And then
you define a class for your neural net.
Uh so the the constructor is going to
just initialize three linear layers. So
linear layers need to in this case be
separate objects because they contain a
vector for the parameter.
The values don't need to be separate
objects because they don't actually have
parameters.
Okay. Um so that's the complexity that's
hidden in in those n linear. So n linear
actually does a little bit more than
just multiplying by a matrix. It also
adds a bias vector.
Uh but
that's okay. So you initialize those
layers with the right sizes that you
pass as argument to the constructor. Uh
and then you define a forward function
which is you know how you kind of
compute the output uh as a function of
the input. And so the the first line
here xview minus one just flattens the
input tensor into a into a vector. And
then you apply the n0 module to x you
get s1. Then apply the value the
nonlinearity to s1 you get z1 etc etc.
And then you return s3.
Okay. Okay. And the beauty of uh
PyTorch, which uh
um Alfredo will explain to you perhaps
tomorrow,
is that you don't need to worry about
computing the gradient because as you
you've you've written the forward
function and PyTorch knows what this
looks like and it knows how to back
propagate gradient to it. It knows how
to transform the graph that corresponds
to your forward function into a graph
that corresponds to the backrop
function. So you don't have to worry
about it. But you still need to know how
to compute gradients because sometimes
you have to write your own module. you
invent this new type of neural net and
it's got this new you know like you know
multi head multittail
you know memory attention
whatever um you know you have to write
your own thing and you basically you
might have to write your own CUDA kernel
or whatever right
but it's pretty simple
yes
layers.
Um so those we use those uh basically so
that we can like have more complex
transformations is that
so as I said if you don't have a
nonlinearity
the whole thing is linear so it doesn't
there's no point having layers
right
okay now you have to think you know what
is the simplest nonlinearity you can
think of it's going to be a pointwise
you know component wise nonlinearity was
what's the simplest complent wes
nonlinearity you can think of something
that has a single kink. Now the funny
thing is we're talking about gradient
based learning and this is not even
differentiable right because it's got a
kink u but
if you're a mathematician and you're
obsessing compositive about it you would
call this not gradient but a subgradient
um but you know how many
mathematications are there here um
there arguments on pyarch forums like
which sub gradient should we use
yes in this part of the function
there's several subgradients so If you
have a function that has a kink in it at
this point, uh any slope that is between
this one and that one is is is correct
is fine. Okay, all of those are are good
subgradients. And so the question is,
you know, should you use something in
kind of somewhere in the middle or just
zero? It doesn't matter because it's
just one point. So it has no impact, no
practical impact.
Okay, so here's the slightly more
general form.
We're going from the kind of specific to
the slightly more general.
Uh so here's um
a form of chain rule for modules that
may have multiple outputs and multiple
inputs or may have inputs that are
vectors and outputs that are vectors.
Okay, I don't
I don't give them different symbols
here. The the basic formula DC over
DZF in this case equal DC over DZG * DZG
over DZF holds. Right? This is the same
chain rule formula that we wrote
previously for scalar functions. It also
applies to vector functions.
Okay. But there's one thing that we need
to remember. Um the gradient of a scalar
function with respect to a vector
is a vector of the same size as the
vector with respect to which you uh
differentiate. But if you if you write
it this way and you want the notations
to be consistent, it's a row vector.
It's not a column vector anymore. Okay?
So take a scalar function which depends
on the vector, therefore a column
vector.
differentiate this scalar function with
respect to the to this uh column vector
and what you get is a row vector. That's
the gradient. It's not the gradient
technically. The gradient is once you
transpose it, but it's dc over dzf.
That's the
that's the notation
and you can see that it kind of checks
out. So let's imagine that uh zg is a
vector, you know, a column vector. So of
size dg by one and zf is a column vector
of size df by one.
Uh then this uh little chain rule uh
equation here gives you a row vector of
size df is equal to a row vector of size
dg multiplied by a matrix whose number
of uh rows is dg and number of columns
is df.
Okay. And of course the size the last
size of
the vector and the first size of the
matrix have to match if you want this
product to work out.
So a more convenient form for this would
be to kind of transpose everything to
say dc over dzfrpose which is now a
column vector
is equal to the transpose of the product
here and that would be the transpose of
dz over dzf times the transpose of dc
over dzg.
And that would be kind of a more
convenient form of writing it, but it's
kind of simpler this way, more
consistent.
Okay, so what's this uh funny animal
here? DZG over DZF. So we have uh a
little neural net here that has two
modules in it, uh F and G. The output of
F of the F module is ZF and the output
of the G module is ZG.
Okay.
And basically we want the gradient of
the cost function with respect to ZF. We
assume we know the gradient of this cost
function with respect to ZG. We know how
to back propagate through C.
And to compute the gradient with respect
to ZF. If we know the gradient respect
to ZG, we need to multiply by this
matrix DZG over DZF which is called the
Jacobian matrix of G with respect to uh
its input.
Okay, G has two arguments. So we can
differentiate it with respect to Z or
respect to W. We're just going to
differentiate it with respect to Z.
Okay, what is this matrix? So the uh uh
entry I J of that matrix the Jacobian
matrix is equal to the partial
derivative of the I output
okay the I component of the output
vector of the G module with respect to
the J component of the input vector.
So if I twiddle the J input, it's gonna
make all the output U
twiddle
and that
basically is an entire column of the
Jacobian matrix.
Okay, that's back prop, right? So if you
have um a network composed of a cascade
of modules,
you just keep multiplying by the jacomi
matrix of all the modules going down and
you get all the gradients respect to all
the internal
uh variables.
Now you actually need two sets of of
gradients. You need the gradients with
respect to the states but also the
gradients with respect to the weights.
And as I as I said a module that has
parameters has two uh jacome matrices
has one with respect to its input state
and another one with respect to its
parameters. Okay. So you have the two
equations here. So let's say now you
have kind of a slightly more general
neural net which is a stack of uh you
know many modules.
Uh each module is called fk. So k is
kind of an index for that module.
And its input is ZK and its parameter is
W K
U and the output is you know ZK plus
one. So ZK plus one equals FK of ZKW KK.
Very simple.
So how do I compute DC over DZK which is
the gradient of the cost function or
whatever function you want to minimize
with respect to the input of module ZK.
Assuming I know DC over DZK + one
already, you just multiply by the
Jacobian matrix of the module K which is
DZK + 1 over DZK or in other words DFK
of ZKW KK with respect to ZK.
Okay, so it's just chain rule again. DZ
over DZK equals DC over DZK equals DC
over DZK + 1 which I assume I know times
the Jacobian matrix of FK with respect
to ZK.
Second line is same thing with respect
to W. DC over DW KK is equal to DC over
DZK + one which I already had at the at
the top and then DZK plus one over DWK
which is the Jacobian matrix of the F
function with respect to its weights to
its parameters. whatever they are.
That's all there is to back prop.
Are you okay?
Any question?
[snorts]
So here's a little concrete example
or semi concrete. Um so let's say we
have you know one of those simple
functions here uh g of xw we don't know
what's inside but it's okay and it goes
to a cost function. It's a graph
and through this manipulation of you
know multiplying by um jacobian matrices
we can transform this graph into the
graph that will compute the the
gradients going backwards and so things
like pytorch and tensorflow do do this
automatically for you. You write a
function it turns it into a graph
and then there is something that turns
this graph into the derivative graph if
you want that back propagates the
gradient. So in this case here the the
gradient graph looks like the one at the
at the right where you start with one at
the top
and then you compute the Jacobian of uh
C with respect to Y bar
you multiply this one number by this
Jacobian
Jacobian is actually a a vector okay
it's a gradient
it's a row vector
And that's dc over d y bar. Then you
multiply that by the jacobian of uh g
with respect to its weight and you get
the gradient with respect to the
weights.
That's what you need to train.
So that's an example of you know
automatic transformation. That's what
autograd does. Now where it becomes
complicated is when the the graph the
architecture of the graph is not fixed.
um but is data dependent. So let's
imagine that depending on the value of x
uh you have a test in your neural net
code that decides that you know if x is
a vector that is longer than a certain
length then you do do one thing and if
it's shorter you do another thing.
um you know then you're going to have
kind of a condition and two graphs
depending on the input right you still
need to generate the graph for back
propagation if you have loops it becomes
complicated
you can still do it
how do
you might have.
Yeah. Um, it it usually doesn't work
very well if the number of loops that
you have is more than say 50. I'm saying
50, it could be 20, right? It depends.
Uh, and you probably heard of LSTM. And
what's special about LSTM compared to
regular recurrent nets is uh one way of
basically making them work for longer
than
like five. Okay, but they don't work
very well past 20 or so. [clears throat]
The point is that you can have a
variable number of um steps.
It's it's specified by program and it
could be variable. Depends on the size
of the input. uh a lot of the neural
nets that people use nowadays have a
variable size. Uh X is could be a
variable size multi-dimensional array
and that means G has variable size
inside and you can have you know kind of
complicated things going on there.
Um so again in terms of uh
the the sizes that those things take
um
so dc over dw is uh is a row vector
which is 1 by n where n is the number of
components of w.
uh dc over dy bar is 1 by m where m is
the dimension of the output and d y bar
of dw is uh number of col number of rows
is the number of outputs of of g and the
number of columns is the dimension of w
which is n. So it checks out. Um
[snorts]
it's all it's all fine.
Okay. Now what kind of uh modules are we
using
uh in neural net? So as I said uh the
linear and reu modules or nonlinear
pointwise nonlinearity modules are just
two examples of things that we use to
build neural nets but or to build deep
learning systems in general. But there's
tons of and tons I mean if you look at
the PyTorch documentation there is like
a huge list of them of such modules and
the reason why you need a a lot of them
I mean most of them are kind of can be
built out of kind of smaller
uh like more elementary functions but
the reason why they are pre-built uh is
because first they have a name but and
they're debugged but also because
they're optimized um so sometimes you
can kind of write you know CUDA kernels
directly or you know they're generated
compiler or something. So, but here's a
bunch of elementary modules.
And I'm not sure I'm going to be able to
use my
Oops.
Okay. Uh let's start with a duplicate
module. So, what is a duplicate module?
It's a u it's a module that takes a
single takes, you know, it's basically a
a Y connector.
Okay. Um you want two people to listen
to music on your iPhone, you need one of
those Y cables.
Um
so
the first output is equal to the input
and the second output is also equal to
the input. Okay. y1 equals x, y2 equals
x.
So you think, you know, you would think
that you don't even need a module like
this, but you actually do. Um,
sometimes, in fact, in PyTorch, it's
kind of implicit, but um,
but you need to make it explicit
sometimes. So whenever you have a wire
that splits into two or n
on the way back, the gradients get
summed.
Okay? And it's exactly the same
situation that I explained earlier.
In fact, you can decompose this little
module that I
explained here.
You can think of
this uh Z variable splitting into three
wires as a as one of those branch
modules.
And as those three wire converge, you
have to sum the gradients. Okay, which
we figured out. But
you can you can sort of build this into
this uh split module,
this duplicate module or triplicate or
endate whatever it is.
Okay. So whenever you copy a variable
where whatever you use a variable in
multiple places, you need to sum the
gradients. Again the autograding in py
pytors is for you but remember this.
Uh so add so if you have two variables
and you sum them up
when you twiddle this guy the output
would twiddle by the same quantity. When
you twiddle this guy the output will
twiddle by the same quantity.
What that means is that the gradient of
whatever function you want to minimize
with respect to the output of a sum is
equal to the
is equal
when you have the gradient of the cost
function with respect to the sum.
What is the gradient with respect to
each of the two branches that you added
up? uh the first branch with respect to
the first output and for the second
branch with respect to the second
output.
Uh it's actually equal for both
branches. Okay, so if you have a
connection going this way and you get a
gradient from the top, you just copy the
gradient.
Okay, it's because you get the same
influence from both sides. But
that depends on how the
both inputs should be same. No,
it's independent of the value of the
inputs,
you have to think about it, but it's
pretty obvious
actually. Let me try this.
Am I going to be able to do this?
Okay.
Does this work?
Huh? Only works if I mirror my screen.
because I can't write on a screen that
doesn't exist.
Okay, hang on with me for just a minute
here.
No, that's not what I wanted.
Okay.
Oops.
Oh, wow. Okay.
All right.
Here we go. [snorts]
Sorry about that.
Let's control plus. That actually works.
Okay,
let's see if this works.
So um
so if y equals
x1 + x2
dc over d x1 let's say is equal to dc
over dy
dy over
dx1.
Okay, this we assume we know
how much is this
one one
and of course
dy of d x2 is also one.
Okay, so there you have it.
dx1 equals dc over dy
d / dx2
equ= dy
just take this over y copy it and you're
done
uh max that's an interesting
So
y equals
max of x1 x2
dc over dx1
equal dc over dy
dy / dx1
It's just chain rule.
What is dy dx1?
It's zero
x2.
Yep. And otherwise
it's one. Yes. Correct.
So in fact you can completely understand
this graphically. Basically, you have
X1. [snorts]
Uh,
say again,
can you can you repeat the answer?
Yes. Yes. Yes.
Uh, right. So, the answer was dy dx1 is
zero if x2 is larger than x1 and is one
if x1 is larger than x2.
Uh, but intuitively it's very simple. If
you have variable X1
and variable X2,
basically the output,
this max module is basically just a
switch.
Okay. Um I'm putting an arrow here, but
it's not an arrow. It's a switch.
Okay. I can move this switch from left
to right. Okay. I can choose to connect
X1 to Y or to connect X2 to Y. Now, once
I've decided on which side I connect,
it's just a wire,
right? Regardless on how high I chose to
put this switch in one position or the
other. In this case, I use max. Okay?
But it's just a switch that I decide to
put on one side or the other. When I
decide to put it on one side, then I've
just connected X1 to Y and it's just a
wire. So [snorts] x2 if I twiddle it has
no influence on the output. Therefore
the gradient of the cost function
respect to x2 is zero.
Okay. And the gradient of the cost
function with respect to x1 is of course
equal to the gradient of the cost
function respect to y because it's just
a y. It's the same variable really.
Okay. So that generalizes
to a switch a switch of multiple
variables.
So, however many variable I have, if the
output is
determined by,
you know, a switch that I can move to
one of the input variables, then when I
back propagate, I just propagate through
the variable that was connected and the
other ones just get zero.
Okay,
it's easier to kind of draw this way
than to actually write the math. You
have to use delta functions and stuff.
It's
Okay. Lockoff Max. That's a fun one.
Oh, I have to use a new page.
But next page actually doesn't go to the
next page. Okay,
so softmax
is a module where the output
yi is equal to
e to the
x i. So it's a module with
um which I should not draw this way
which I should draw this way
and it has
as many outputs as it has inputs.
I'm calling these the yi
and these the xj let's say okay or x
whatever. Um so softmax is
this
okay it's a very convenient way of
transforming a bunch of numbers into a
bunch of positive numbers between zero
and one that sum to one okay when I take
the exponential so x the xjs can be any
number when I take the exponential of
those numbers I get positive numbers and
I normalize by their sum so what I get
is a bunch of numbers that are between
zero and one and one to one which some
people call a probability distribution.
Okay, so you can interpret yi as a
vector of probabilities over a discrete
set of outcomes.
What is log softmax?
Um
so log softmax is oops that's not what I
wanted to do.
Is the log of that
So you get the log of the stuff at the
top minus the log of the stuff at the
bottom, right? So you get the log of
exponential xi
and that's going to be x i
unless I'm mistaken.
And then you get the log of the sum of
you get minus the log of the sum of the
exponentials of xjs, right? So that will
give us x i minus
log
of s / j
of e
to the xj. That's called log submax.
Now uh the guy who invented softmax in
1989 or so or maybe 88 I don't remember
is a gentleman by the name of John
Bridle a uh
from Britain and he regretted calling it
softmax. He said it should have been
called soft agmax.
Uh but it's too late. People call it
softmax.
So um here's an interesting exercise for
you. I'm not going to tell you how you
back propagate to this. Okay, but I want
you to do the calculation. That's a very
good exercise. So
lockoff max is actually a module in
Python but
um do it on your own. It's a perfect
exercise. So basically
compute dc over dx
k
assuming that you know all the
dc over dy
i's. Okay. So you're going to have a
bunch of doody.
Uh so here you only have one output
actually but that's okay.
So let's say there is only one yi
and you know the gradient of the loss
with respect to this yi. What is the
gradient of the loss with respect to all
of the xks?
That's
good exercise. Is it an official
homework
tonight?
It's an official homework tonight. Okay.
It's more than just an exercise.
You can find the answer, but it's more
fun to kind of, you know, I mean, you're
not you don't you don't run as much if
you don't kind of try by yourself if you
just look the answer.
Okay. So
uh the uh softmax and log is a
combination of
of modules that is very commonly used in
in the multiclass classification right
so you would take a neural net the last
module would be a softmax so it would
normalize all the outputs make them
positive make them look like
probabilities and what you want is you
want to uh maximize
the probability that the model gives to
the correct answer. Okay, so you know
the correct answer is bird. Bird is
number four in your categories. You want
the fourth output of your softmax to be
as high as possible. Okay.
Um so that's the that would be log
softmax. Um now if you separate this in
two things. So if you have softmax and
then you take the log of the output as
your cost function, the log of the
correct output of your cost function
uh you get a you get numerical issues
because
you don't get log of zero. Okay, so as
the score gets very very small the log
kind of diverges and you get sort of
numerical problems. So you're better off
writing locksoft max directly as a
single module uh because then the that
numerical issue disappears.
What does the law do that you don't
get from
Okay. Uh that's a good question. Um
in fact, it's a very good question for
the next 20 minutes. Um
not just the next 20 minutes actually.
I stupidly put my pen back. Did I? What
did I do with my pen?
I have no idea what I did with a pen.
It's here. Okay. [snorts] Um
Okay. Okay, so let's say we're going to
have a neural net and it's going to take
a an x variable and then it's going to
have
uh w0 and then a
value and then
w1.
Okay. And now we get
uh a bunch of scores and we want to turn
this into
uh
a score between um zero and one.
Now this network has only one output
and so it can only do two class
classification.
Um and the module we're going to put
here is the
sigmoid function
also called logistic function. And so
this function is
uh h
of uh let's call it s since we've called
this s before
1 / 1 + exponential
minus s.
Okay. So this function when s is very
large this exponential is equal to close
to zero and so
h is equal to one and when uh uh s is uh
very small or highly negative
uh then this exponential becomes very
large and so the overall function is
zero. Okay. So that function
is like this and here it's 0.5
and the asmtote here is + one and here
it's just zero.
0.5 is unreadable.
Okay.
So I could just uh take the output here
which I can call y bar
and plug this to some cost function
which I compare with y. Okay. Now so y
would be also a binary variable zero or
one.
Now what what do this uh cost function
what what should it do? I could use
squared error, right? So C could be
equal to the difference between Y and Y
bar
squared.
Sounds perfectly reasonable. Doesn't
work very well. reason it doesn't work
very well is that the
is that the sigmoid uh and and people
you know in the early days of neural
nets in the 1980s were doing this very
commonly and the network wouldn't
converge and they would say neural nets
don't work but they were just doing it
wrong. So uh the problem we have here is
that
uh if y is equal to one for one class
and zero for the other class
the system wants to get the output equal
to one and it can't because it's an
asmtote. So it tries to make the weights
w1 very very large so that it gets to
one or to zero. It has to make the
weighted some enormous you know if it if
it wants to uh get close to the desired
output but there the gradient is very
small right because the derivative of
that sigmoid that sigmoid is very flat
there. So when you back propagate the
gradient is basically zero because the
the sigmoid is flat.
So you get this saturation problem.
So some people like me said uh you know
back in the old days one of two things
either you set your targets
uh in between so not at the asmtotes or
you use a different loss. Okay so uh so
basically you say here's the sigmoid
function the target for category one is
going to be at I don't know 8 and the
target for category 2 is going to be at
0 2. So there those would be attainable
and so the weights won't go to infinity
and you won't have those uh problems.
But here's another uh idea and the other
idea is just take the log of it. Okay,
take the log. So if you think about this
this little function here, it's actually
a soft max.
It's a soft max between two variables,
one of which is equal to minus x, the
other one is equal to one.
And what you're getting is the softmax
output from from the input that's always
equal to one.
Okay, let me write this function in
another way.
I'm going to multiply the top and the
bottom by e to the s. Okay. So I get E
to the S divided by E to the S plus E to
the S * E to the minus S and that's one.
Okay, this is a soft max.
A soft max where one input is one, the
other one is S. And what I'm looking at
is the S, the output corresponding to
the S input.
So the sigmoid is just you know submax
is just a generalization of the sigmoid
for multiple outputs.
Um now if you take the log of this
You get s minus
log of 1 +
e to the s.
Okay.
And now the question is and again this
is a special case of softmax with only
two inputs where one is equal to one.
One of the one of the two inputs is
equal to one.
Okay. So the effect of the log like look
at this uh this function here.
This function looks like
this.
where when s is very large the one
doesn't count in the sum and so you
basically have log of exponential s
which is just s right so for large s is
just the identity function
and for small s the one dominates and so
it's log one which is zero and so you
get zero it's kind of like a soft real
kind of thing
but the point is it doesn't saturate.
So you don't get those vanishing
gradient issue.
Um
when s is large it should be zero right
s
1 + e power s.
Yes. But you have a log in front. So log
e power s is s.
Yeah. So s minus s could be zero, right?
Oh yeah. I mean sure. I mean if you do s
minus s then I was just talking about
the second term.
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean s minus this is kind of the other
way around. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely.
Yeah. Yeah, if you take the entire the
entire function
um
it's it's the exact opposite.
Okay. Um,
do we have softmax also as one of the
exercises or no?
Softmax is on.
Yeah. Right. Okay. All right. So, let's
uh end with a few tricks uh practical
tricks and
[clears throat] you'll you'll see more
of them uh tomorrow and as you start
playing with back prop.
Um, so the idea of using value instead
of hyperbolic tangent. So hyperbolic
tangent is just like the sigma I just
showed except that it's multiplied by
two and you subtract one. So it it goes
from minus one to one instead of 0 to
one. Um, but it's essentially the same
shape.
Huh?
We saw it last week.
Yeah, we talked about it last week. Uh,
and they they're both flinging out of
favor. uh relu tends to work much better
when you have many layers. Uh and
probably the reason is that it's uh it's
scale invariant in the sense that or
scale equivariant. If uh if the input is
uh if you multiply the input by two, the
output will be multiplied by two but
otherwise unchanged, right? It's got
only one kink and so it has no scale to
it.
Whereas if you have two kinks then you
know the input has to have a particular
variance to kind of fit those two kinks
in the right place.
Uh so people use radio
they use cross entropy loss for
classification log softmax is a special
case
uh a simple special case of uh u cross
entropy loss. Uh we'll we'll come back
to that.
There's a word of caution there.
Yes. that loss functions in PyTorch
that are for classification such as
cross entropy loss like definitely
expect the log softmaxes but it's super
easy to accidentally miss that
documentation you'll use a softmax
instead of a log softmax and debugging
for hours
right yeah you want to use log softmax
not softmax definitely uh if you feed it
to a cross entropy loss function it
expects outputs from a log softmax not a
softmax
Uh if you don't know this yet, you might
waste a lot of time. Um use stoastic
gradient on mini batches. We talked
about this before. Uh you want to
shuffle the training samples. So if you
use stocastic gradient, the order of the
examples matters. Uh if if you have, I
don't know, a 10-way classification,
you're doing nist, right? You're
classifying the 10 digits from 0 to 9.
If you put all the zeros, then all the
ones all the twos, then etc. It's not
going to work because what's going to
happen is that in the first few examples
of zeros, the system will adapt the
biases of the last layer to just produce
the correct output. And we'll never
learn what a zero looks like. And then
you show one and it's going to take just
a few samples for it to adapt the biases
so that it learns to produce one without
actually looking at the input. And it's
going to keep doing this for eons and
eons and it's never going to converge.
So you absolutely need to shuffle the
examples. Uh in the case of Nest, but
it's true also for a lot of others. Uh
you probably want uh in a mini batch, as
I said before, in a mini batch, you want
examples of all the categories. If you
really want to use a mini batch, uh use
samples from different categories.
And if you don't use a mini batch, just,
you know, have samples of different
categories one after the other. Uh there
is debates as to whether you need to
change the order of the samples at every
pass through the samples. It's not
entirely clear. Uh some people claim
it's better if you don't. Some people
people claim it's better if you do with
you know various theoretical arguments
for it. Uh you need to normalize the
input variable. So if you look at
standard uh code that people publish for
training on imageet or speech
recognition or whatever uh the first
operation they do is that they they uh
they normalize the inputs. What do they
do? They um
So an image is really going to be three
planes R,
G,
and B.
Okay, so it's uh think of it as a
threedimensional array where the first
dimension is uh color plane and the
other two dimensions are space or
sometimes the other way around,
sometimes the channel is last. Um but
it's better to think of it this way. Um
so what you do is you take each of those
guys.
So let's say blue.
You compute the mean of
uh all the all the variables in this
blue image. And you do this for every
single image in your training set. Okay?
Take the entire training set or a good
chunk of it and compute the mean of all
the blue uh inputs for the entire
training set. That gives you a single
scalar. Right? Let's call it
MB. So it's the mean of all the blues.
Okay.
So inly you can do the same. You can
compute the standard deviation, right?
Compute the variance of all the blues
and take the square root. That's the
standard deviation. Sigma B.
Do the same for green.
Do the same for red.
Okay? Okay, so you get six numbers, six
scalar values. And now what you do is
you take uh whenever you see an image.
Um
you take the R component
uh J
uh and to normalize it, you replace it
by
itself minus
the mean divided by the standard
deviation
or the
max of the standard deviation and some
small quantity
so it doesn't blow up.
Uh what does that do for you? It
normalizes the contrast and it normal
and it it makes the variant zero.
This is good for various reasons. In
fact, it's a good idea to have variables
inside of a neural net that are zero
mean and unit variance or kind of
variance that are more or less all the
same.
Of course, you do this also for the
green and the blue.
Yeah.
Calculated across many images or is it
done per image?
Across across many images. It's a single
mean
for all the calculate the mean.
Yeah, I mean there's various ways to do
it. Some uh you can do it for a single
image, for a group of images. You can do
it which is what batch does. Uh you can
also do it like on a small piece of an
image. Uh that's called high pass
filtering. But the simplest thing is and
what almost everybody does in kind of
standard standard imageet pipeline or
image processing image recognition
pipeline with conver nets for example is
this.
Is there a reason why you do um you
normalize each channel instead of just
calculating.
Yeah, the channels have very different
uh means and and so you know uh in a
typical natural image uh when you're in
you know outside and inside the the
components would be very different. You
don't have color shift uh and the
amplitude of blue is uh relatively low.
For example, if you are in full sun, the
amplitude of red is basically
non-existent. If you are underwater, um
so you know, if uh if you want any kind
of uh signal, you need to kind of
normalize. This is basically like
automatic gain control. Uh the means are
very different of course because that
depends on the overall luminosity and
you don't want a system that where the
recognition depends too much on the
global illumination of your image. So
that's a way of kind of getting rid of
global illumination if you want and sort
of you know kind of bad tuning of your
ex exposure or contrast or whatever it
is.
Uh but there's very good sort of
numerical reasons for doing this.
Uh
so in most um pre-cooked
and and we'll come back for why this is
a good idea. Okay. uh later in most uh
pre-code code you will also find things
uh schedules to decrease the learning
rate so the learning rate the ADA uh
system first of all most systems don't
use just plain stoastic gradient they
use things like atom which automatically
adapt the the step size or other tricks
uh they also use what's called a
momentum trick um or nest of momentum in
particular um you know which Adam
integrates
uh and generally Even if you really want
good results, you need to kind of
decrease your learning rate as time goes
by.
And so there are kind of standard ways
of, you know, scheduling the decrease of
the learning rate that that that you can
use.
Um,
occasionally, not always, um, you can
use a bit of L2 L1 regularization on the
way. Uh, so what does that mean? That
means so L2 regularization means at
every update you multiply every weight
by one minus a small constant multiply
by the learning rate.
So basically
and people call this weight decay.
statisticians
call this L2 regular regularization.
Basically, you have an additional in in
addition to your
uh in your in your loss function
in addition to your cost
you have a regularization term that only
depends on the weight. The cost depends
on the [music] sample as well, right?
uh and you have some sort of variable to
control this importance here.
So L2 value regularization means uh
R of W equals the square norm of W.
When you compute the gradient of R with
respect to uh a particular component of
W,
uh what you get is two
um
to W I.
And so in the update rule
uh
when you do
wi is replaced by wi minus aa
gradient of your overall loss with
respect to w.
Um what you get is w i minus ada times
the gradient of the cost with respect to
w
uh minus because it's a minus gradient
to
alpha
wy this is wi
oh you're right
wish I can rewrite
as
so this is wi
and I can rewrite as
wi * 1 -
theta alpha
minusa
dc over dwi
okay so what does that mean you take
every weight and at every iteration you
shrink it by a constant that's slightly
less than one
and so that's why it's called weight
decay
in the absence of any gradient from C
the weights exponentially decay to zero
okay so what that does is that it tries
to tell the system um you know minimize
my cost function but do it with a weight
vector that is as short as possible
Okay, the other one is L1. So L1
regularization
uh is basically a regularization term
equal to
um
sum over I of
absolute value of
uh wi sorry
let's see z
which is the one norm.
So
when you do the the gradient update you
get uh wi minus aa
dc over dwi
and then what is the gradient of this um
or minus the gradient of this? That
would be um [snorts]
sine
of wy and of course you need the alpha
in front.
So this is a constant which is posit
which is uh
positive if wi is positive negative if
it's negative but there's a minus sign
in front. So um
basically here uh wi is being shrunk
towards zero by a constant equal to ada*
alpha.
Uh the statisticians call this lassu
least absolute
whatever.
Okay, I mean it's some cute acronym,
right? There's some sort of pun in it,
but um and they pronounce it lassu for a
reason I never understood. Um
and so that basically shrinks the all
the weights towards zero by a constant.
And what that means is that if a weight
is not useful, it's going to get
eliminated to zero.
Okay.
And uh that is very interesting when you
have like a very large particular a very
large uh like a network with a very
large number of inputs many of which are
not very useful. This will basically
eliminate the inputs that are not very
useful because the weights that connect
to it will go to zero. So one other
question
so when would we use L2ization over the
L1
okay so first of all you don't want to
use it at at the start because there is
a curious thing with neural nets which
is that um the origin of weight space is
kind of a settle point and so if you if
you crank up L1 or L2 initially the
weights just go to zero and nothing
works so um so it's in one of the tricks
Actually I I forgot uh a very important
one in this list
uh which is that the weights have to be
initialized in a neural net and they
have to be initialized properly. There's
various tricks that are built into
pytorch to initialize. Uh one trick is
called the kiming trick. It's actually
the leu trick from 20 years earlier. But
um and the idea is uh it was reinvented
multiple times. But the idea is uh you
you want the
the weights uh that that go into a unit
to be to be random. I mean you
initialize them randomly but you don't
want them to be too large or too small.
You want them to be kind of roughly the
right size so that the output is roughly
the same variance as the inputs. Okay.
Okay. So if the inputs to a unit are
independent,
the variance of the output
uh the variance of the weighted sum will
be equal to the sum of the variances of
the input multiplied by weighted by the
square of the weights.
Okay.
So if you want if you have n inputs and
you want the output to have the same
variance as the input, you need the
weights to be proportional to the
inverse square root of the number of
inputs.
Okay, and that's that's basically the
trick. So you initialize the weights to
values whose are drawn randomly uh with
zero mean and the variance is one over
the square root of the number of inputs
to that unit.
Okay. And that's you know hard you know
built into PyTorch as well. So
initialization is super important and it
it can't if you do it wrong your network
is not going to converge.
Yeah.
Do in practices the constant that is
used with L1 or L2 regularization that
also decreased over the number of sorry
increase?
Well, I mean, you probably want to start
with a alpha equals zero and then maybe
crank it up and then it depends, you
know, how much you want to regularize,
how much is necessary. I mean, a lot of
people just don't use any, okay, either
L1 or L2, but they do use dropout. Okay,
so dropout is another type of
regularization. Uh, and and you can
think of it as a layer inside of a
neural net that you just insert in a
neural net. And what dropout does is
that it randomly
um it's a it's a box that has n input
and n outputs
and uh it randomly sets
n over two of the outputs to zero and
it's a random draw at every new sample
that you draw. That layer basically
kills half of its components.
Okay, that seems crazy, right?
Um but in fact it kind of makes the
other variables more robust. Basically
it forces the system to not rely on any
single unit to produce an answer. It
sort of distributes the information
across all the units because it knows
that during training you know half of
them can disappear. So it it tends to
kind of distribute the information
better. It's a trick that uh you know
Jeffington and his team came up with and
turns out to be a you know quite
efficient way of regularizing neural
nets. A lot of people use I mean there's
variations of it but
and we'll talk about more of those. They
are in one of those papers efficient
back props uh that I wrote many years
ago and that you are invited to read.
Okay, last thing for today even though
we're late um this trick I I mean this
this whole framework of having a compute
graph and back propagating to it of
course it doesn't work just for uh
stacked module. It works for any
arrangement of module including the ones
that are dynamical that depend on on on
the inputs question.
Yeah. So why do we care about really not
caring about the scale if we're
normalizing to zero mean and one?
Yeah. Uh so the question is why
why do we care about the fact that
values are scale equariant if we're
going to normalize anyway?
The question is where do you normalize
to? So if you have sigmoids and you
normalize you're basically forcing the
system if your normal if the variance
for example is too small then the system
is not going to be able to use the
nonlinearity in the sigmoid hyperbolic
tangent let's say uh if you make it too
small it's going to saturate so what's
the right setup not clear
you don't care as long as it's the same
variance all over the network if it's
not the same variance all over the
network then you know you're going to
get issues uh some layers are going to
learn faster than others Some are going
to diverge when others are converging.
So, uh you want the variances to be
roughly the same all over the network.
And uh you know that's what things like
batchorm uh do for you. We haven't
talked about batch norm yet but
okay that's it for today. Thank you. See
you next week.